We learned earlier that the LS command
can be used to determine the type of file.
The first letter of the first column
in the listing from an ls-l command
indicates the file type.
In this case, the dash implies
the file called bash-script.sh is a file.
Similarly, identifiers for other file types
are d for directory,
c for character device,
b for block device,
l for links,
s for socket files,
and p for named pipes.
What do the other characters
such as rwx in the first column mean?
These characters describe
the file permissions in Linux.
These characters can be broken down
as the owner permissions,
group permissions,
and permissions for others.
The first three characters
after the file identifier
are the permissions for the owner of the file
denoted by the letter u.
The next three characters are permissions
for the group owning the file
denoted by a g.
Finally, the last three characters
are the permissions for all other users,
denoted by o.
When an r bit is set,
the respective user
has read permissions to the file.
It has the octal value of four.
We will see what an octal value is in a minute.
When the w bit is set,
they have write permissions to the file
with an octal value of two.
Finally, if the x bit is set,
the user has the execute permissions
for the file,
which has an octal value of one.
With directories,
the same set of permissions
that we saw for the file are still applicable.
R bit when set allows the user
to read the contents of the directory,
w bit allows right operation
in the directory,
but what does the execute x bit do?
Let us consider a directory
with the permissions shown here.
The directory is owned by Bob
and the owner
has only the execute permission
as such.
If Bob tries to list
the contents of the directory,
he will get a "Permission denied" error.
This is because
despite being the owner of the directory,
Bob does not have read access to it.
All the other users, however,
have full access to this directory
because they have the read, write,
and execute bit set for them.
Bob, however, can cd into the directory
since the directory has the x bit
set for the owner.
But wait,
Bob is part of the group called bob,
which has full access to the directory.
Why doesn't he have read access then?
This is because in Linux,
the system identifies the user
trying to access the file or directory
and checks the permissions sequentially.
If the user trying to access is the owner,
the owner's permissions
for the file are applied
and the rest is ignored.
Similarly, if the user is not the owner
but part of the group,
only the group permissions are applied.
The others are ignored.
Now, let us look at the octal values
we discussed earlier.
The rwx permissions we have seen so far
can be represented by a three digit
numeric value in octal notation.
Each permission has a corresponding value.
R, the read bit, has a value of four.
W, the write permission, has a value of two.
X or the execute bit has a value of one.
For no permission, use the value zero.
The permission of rwx would be seven,
which is 4+2+1,
and r-x would be five,
which is 4+0+1.
Similarly, by adding
the corresponding values,
we can see that the write
and execute permission
can be represented by three,
and read an execute permission
by five in octal notation.
Now that we know how file permissions
are represented in Linux,
let us use that
to change permissions of some files.
The command used to modify
the permissions of a file is called chmod,
and the syntax to use this command
is chmod followed by the permission
and finally, the file name.
Permissions can be modified in two ways,
symbolic mode and numeric mode.
Both modes lead to the same result.
In symbolic mode, the first characters
following the chmod command
specify whose permission you want to alter.
For the user, you specify u,
g for the group,
and o for others.
These three can be clubbed together
in any combination as required.
After these characters, you need to specify
if you want to grant access with a plus symbol
or revoke existing access
with the minus symbol.
Finally, we provide the file or directory
for which the permissions have to be changed.
Let us now see the same operation
using the numeric mode.
In this mode, we can specify
the permission to be updated
in terms of the three digit octal values
we saw earlier.
The first of the three digit value
is the permissions for the owner.
The next, that of the group.
Finally, the last digits,
the permissions of others.
Chmod 777 applies seven,
which is read, write, execute to every user,
owner, group, and others to the file.
Chmod 555 applies read
and execute permissions for all.
660 provides read and write
for user and group,
but no permissions for others.
Finally, 750 provides
complete access to owners,
read and execute for group,
and no permissions for anyone else.
You can change permissions accordingly
by using the correct sequence
of the three digit octal values.
Now that we have seen how to assign
permissions to a file or directory,
let's see how to change
the ownership and group.
This can be done using the chown command.
The syntax for this is chown
followed by the new owner
and group separated by a colon,
and finally, the file or directory.
If a group is not provided,
only the ownership is changed.
The group can be changed
using a similar command called chgrp.
This command modifies
only the group of the file or directory.
Now, let us test these concepts
with a hands-on lab exercise.